== HBEAT Message Specification ==

This schema provides the description of heartbeat message send by xPL devices on the xPL network. This schema is part of the core [[../xPL Core Protocol.mediawiki|XPL Specification Document]].

== XPL-STAT Structure ==
If a device is configurable, but has not yet been configured, it should send heartbeats according to the [[Schema_-_CONFIG|config schema]].
=== HBEAT.BASIC ===
The ''hbeat.basic'' heartbeat is for use by small devices, such as PIC systems. PC based applications must use the ''hbeat.app'' schema, because of hub requirements.

 hbeat.basic
 {
 interval=[interval in minutes]
 [version=[version info]]
 (...additional info defined by the developer)
 }
Each device is required to send a ''hbeat.basic'' or ''hbeat.app'' at a regular interval. Version info is preferably formatted as 1 to 4 integers separated by a dot ('.') (eg. ''version=0.4'' or ''version=1.2.0.1234'').

=== HBEAT.APP ===

The ''hbeat.app'' heartbeat is for use by PC based applications, using ethernet. They must use this schema, because it contains the necessary information for the hub to communicate with the xPL application.
The schema is identical to the ''hbeat.basic'' version except for the addition of keys ''remote-ip'' and ''port''.

 hbeat.app
 {
 interval=[interval in minutes]
 port=[listening port]
 remote-ip=[local IP address]
 [version=[version info]]
 (...additional info defined by the developer)
 }
Each device is required to send a ''hbeat.basic'' or ''hbeat.app'' at a regular interval.
PC based applications should start sending ''hbeat.app'' messages approximately every 3 to 10 seconds, until they receive their own echo (which means that the hub on the PC the application is running on is working), then they should revert to regular intervals.
If the PC based application has not received an echo within 2 minutes, then it should revert to sending a heartbeat every 30 seconds until it gets its own echo.

Version info is preferably formatted as 1 to 4 integers separated by a dot ('.') (eg. ''version=0.4'' or ''version=1.2.0.1234'').

=== HBEAT.END ===

The ''hbeat.end'' heartbeat will notify other xPL devices that the device is no longer available. It allows devices that track other devices to clean up.

 hbeat.end
 {
 (...additional info defined by the developer)
 }
''hbeat.end'' should only be sent if the heartbeat messages sent so far were ''hbeat.basic'' or ''hbeat.app''. If they were ''config.basic'' or ''config.app'' then ''config.end'' should be sent instead.
It is not required for devices to sent the ''hbeat.end''.

== XPL-CMND Structure ==

=== HBEAT.REQUEST ===

 hbeat.request
 {
 command=request
 }

The target device(s) will respond with a ''hbeat.app'' or ''hbeat.basic'' response. It is not required for devices to support this request. 

== XPL-TRIG Structure ==
Not applicable for heartbeats.

== Standard Schema Notes ==
The heartbeat interval depends on the state of a device. Regular heratbeat intervals are anywhere between 5 and 9 minutes.
