== LOG.BASIC Message Specification ==

*Class = LOG
*Type  = BASIC

This schema provides the ability for a device to transmit information relating to it's operation.

== XPL-CMND Structure ==

Not applicable.

== XPL-TRIG Structure ==

 log.basic
 {
 type=inf | wrn | err
 text=<text to be logged>
 [code=<event-specific code>]
 }

== XPL-STAT Structure ==

Not applicable.


== Schema Specific Notes ==
---------------------

This schema should be used when a device wishes to transmit information relating to it's operation.
Messages using the log.basic schema can be monitored centrally and optionally logged
to a database to provide a complete operational activity log of an entire xPL network.

The type element should be used to broadly specify the type of information, and can be one of the following values:
inf - The message is for informational purposes only.
wrn - A warning message to indicate possible problems with a device that may require the attention of the user.
err - An error has occurred, causing a device to fail or become partially inoperative.

The text element should be used to specify the information that is being logged.
Device vendors should take note of the 128-character limit that applies to any value within a name/value pair.

The code element can be used to specify a numeric representation of the event.
Vendors are free to define their own event codes that are specific to their devices.
A complete listing of all possible event messages (and their associated event codes, if implemented)
should be included as part of the documentation that accompanies any xPL-enabled device making use of the log.basic schema.

Devices should not generate excessive log.basic messages, particularly of an informational variety, as this
could lead to congestion of the xPL network.

== [[Standard Schema Notes]] ==