== OSD.BASIC Message Specification ==

*Class = OSD
*Type  = BASIC

This Schema provides a method of displaying text messages to an xPL
implementation.

== XPL-CMND Structure ==

 osd.basic
 {
 command=clear|write|exclusive|release
 [text=<text to display. each line should be seperated by the \n seperator>]
 [row=<display row>]
 [column=<display from column>]
 [delay=<seconds to display>]
 }

exclusive/release allow another device to take exclusive control of
the osd device.  The osd device should ignore all messages from any
other source while locked.  exclusive/release should be sent on their
own only, and be targetted at the osd device.  Both should perform a
clear.


== XPL-TRIG Structure ==

 osd.confirm
 {
 command=clear|write|exclusive|release
 [text=<text to display. each line should be seperated by the \n seperator>]
 [row=<display row>]
 [column=<display from column>]
 [delay=<seconds to display>]
 }

A Trigger Message with class osd.confirm MAY be sent by the
application or device to confirm the actual actions taken in
displaying a given message.  This confirmation message should contain
the original details, with the provisions that:

If the Display Device does not support overwriting, and executes a
clear each time, the Trigger message should contain command=clear
rather than command=write

If the Display Device does not support indefinite display, but clears
after (for example, 15 seconds) the Trigger message should contain
delay=15 rather than delay=0

== XPL-STAT Structure ==

 hbeat.*
 {
 (hbeat items)
 } 


== Schema Specific Notes ==

command is the only compulsory item.

When command=clear is used, the display device should execute a "clear
screen" operation before displaying the message.  It is valid to send a
command=clear without any further text to display.

When command=write is used, the display device will simply process the
text information, possibly overlapping any existing display.  Devices
are not required to support this mode of operation.  When command=write
is used, text is mandatory.

A Value of delay=0 should be interpreted by the application as either
"maximum possible delay", or as appropriate, "do not clear".  Delays
are cumulative, that is, text that is placed on screen with a delay of
5 seconds will remain on screen if a subsequent message specifies a
further delay.

row, column and delay should have default values appropriate to the
class of display device within the device or application.


== [[Standard Schema Notes]] ==