== OSD.TIVO ==

*Class = OSD
*Type = TIVO

This Schema provides a method of displaying text messages to an xpl implementation. It contains Tivo specific functionality

== XPL-CMND Structure ==

 OSD.TIVO
 {
 COMMAND=[CLEAR / WRITE / EXCLUSIVE / RELEASE]
 [TEXT=<text to display. each line should be seperated by the \n seperator>]
 [ROW=<display row>]
 [COLUMN=<display from column>]
 [DELAY=<seconds to display>]
 [FORECOL=<foreground colour>]
 [BACKCOL=<background colour>]
 }

Exclusive/Release allow another device to take exclusive control of the osd device The osd device should ignore all messages from any other source while locked Exclusive/Release should be sent on their own only, and be targetted at the osd device Both should perform a CLEAR

== XPL-TRIG Structure ==

 OSD.CONFIRM
 {
 COMMAND=[CLEAR / WRITE]
 [TEXT=<text to display. each line should be seperated by the \n seperator>]
 [ROW=<display row>]
 [COLUMN=<display from column>]
 [DELAY=<seconds to display>]
 } 

A Trigger Message with class OSD.CONFIRM MAY be sent by the application or device to confirm the actual actions taken in displaying a given message. This confirmation message should contain the original details, with the provisions that:

If the Display Device does not support overwriting, and executes a CLEAR each time, the Trigger message should contain COMMAND=CLEAR rather than COMMAND=WRITE

If the Display Device does not support indefinite display, but clears after (for example, 15 seconds) the Trigger message should contain DELAY=15 rather than DELAY=0

== XPL-STAT Structure ==

 HBEAT.*
 {
 (hbeat items)
 }

== Schema Specific Notes ==

COMMAND= is the only compulsory item.

When COMMAND=CLEAR is used, the display device should execute a "clear screen" operation before displaying the message. It is valid to send a COMMAND=CLEAR without any further text to display.

When COMMAND=WRITE is used, the display device will simply process the TEXT= information, possibly overlapping any existing display. Devices are not required to support this mode of operation. When COMMAND=WRITE is used, TEXT= is mandatory.

A Value of DELAY=0 should be interpreted by the application as either "maximum possible delay", or as appropriate, "do not clear". Delays are cumulative, that is, text that is placed on screen with a delay of 5 seconds will remain on screen if a subsequent message specifies a further delay.

ROW, COLUMN and DELAY should have default values appropriate to the class of display device within the device or application

FORECOL and BACKCOL values will be added to this schema when identified

== [[Standard Schema Notes]] ==